README.md, before:

# Compoventuals

One day, we'll come up with a better name.

**Under development - don't use for anything critical; API may change at any time!**

## Building

First, install NodeJs >= 15.6 from [nodejs.org](nodejs.org).

Next, ensure you have npm 7 or higher:

```bash
$ npm -v
```

If this is not the case, you can update to the latest version using (may require sudo/root permissions):

```bash
$ npm install -g npm@latest
```

Then, install dependencies and build all sources.
It's best to run the build before opening your IDE, as we generate some sources.

```bash
$ npm install
$ npm run build
```

You can also run all tests to ensure that everything is working as expected:

```bash
$ npm run test
```

**Note:**
When running these commands from the top-level directory, it will be run in all subprojects automatically.
You can also run them in each subproject to achieve the same result.
Note that some subprojects also support `npm run tscw` or `npm run wpw` to have things rebuild automatically on file save.

## Viewing documentation

TypeDoc documentation is created in the docs/ directory of each subpackage as part of `npm run build`. You can view it by opening docs/index.html in a browser.

## How to run the local server?

Run the following command under root folder `/compoventuals`, the local server will listen on port `3000`:

```bash
$ npm start
```

Access the service via `localhost:3000`, look at the console to see outputs of current deployment.

If you need to connect using https due to browser restrictions (e.g. for Matrix widgets), instead run

```bash
$ npm start https
```

Then access the service via `https://localhost:3000/`, accept the self-signed certificate warning, and continue as usual. Of course, don't use this https setup for anything serious, since the server key is public.

## How to build on Heroku?

Deploys to https://compoventuals-tests.herokuapp.com/

- The Heroku deployment will be automatically triggered by `git commit` and `git push`.
- The Heroku server will run `npm install` and `npm build` to build the project, and `npm start` to run it (according to Procfile).

Options for manual deployment:

- Log in your Heroku with CLI tool and verify on browser:

```
heroku login
```

- Create a heroku project on your machine by running (in the repo's top-level directory):

```
heroku create
```

This should also create a git remote repo named `heroku`. See [here](https://devcenter.heroku.com/articles/git#creating-a-heroku-remote) for how to customize or repair this if needed.

- Commit and push the code on Heroku master just like the way you do on Github:

```
git add ${selected files}
git commit -m ${commit messages}
git push heroku master
```

## Development

We recommend setting up "Format on Save" in your editor.
See [Prettier's editor setup instructions](https://prettier.io/docs/en/editors.html).

If you don't set this, you'll need to run `npm run fix` in the top-level directory before committing and pushing your code to github. Otherwise, the CI will complain that the format is wrong.

## License

Licensed under Apache 2.0.

Created by Matthew Weidner, Heather Miller, Huairui Qi, Maxime Kjaer, Ria Pradeep, Ignacio Maronna, and Benito Geordie at [CMU's Composable Systems Lab](https://www.composablesystems.org/).

Commit message:

Cleanup (#178)
* networks: register -> onreceive, so receive can be private

* skip tests with 1sec pause

* error if send called during receive

* protobuf cleanup

* semidirect: search most recent first

* type Object -> object

* comment why circular load dependencies are impossible

* Change -> Message event

* replace batching options with BatchingStrategy

* don't use delete operator

* CompositeCrdt -> CObject, PrimitiveCrdt -> CPrimitive

* misc comment fixes

* arrayAsString -> bytesAsString, stringAsArray -> stringAsBytes

* avoid unsafe latin1 strings (performance penalty)

* micro_crdts: CText instead of PrimitiveCList

* remove Treedoc, BitSet

* fix abstract CObject wrappers

* MNumber -> CNumber

* semidirect tests

* add replicaId tests

* disable DefaultCausalBroadcastNetwork logs

* Crdt parenting requirement

* module support in README.md

* containers: embed in HTML file

* selector: use container title

* clean up counter demos

* demos: listen on Change events

* event.timestamp -> event.meta

* remove unused Message event

* new Change event (per event)

* fix CNumber negative mults

* fix CNumber test failure

* add waits before load/save measurements

* CMountPoint: remove preMount

* add getArgs methods

* selector demo: add download button

* benchmarks: skip rounds

* load benchmarks: also time reading the state

* non-yata rich text demo (bug: last line)

* DeletingMutCSet initialValuesArgs

* add initialValuesArgs to DeletingMutCList

* fix rich text last char bugs

* add rich text benchmark

* refactor cursors; add CCursor

* skip unimplemented tensor save tests

* update benchmark scripts

* number warnings

* add toString() methods

* CText: use toString() instead of join

* fix rich text embed bug

* add container download links

README.md, after:

# Compoventuals

One day, we'll come up with a better name.

**Under development - don't use for anything critical; API may change at any time!**

## Building

First, install NodeJs >= 15.6 from [nodejs.org](nodejs.org).

Next, ensure you have npm 7 or higher:

```bash
$ npm -v
```

If this is not the case, you can update to the latest version using (may require sudo/root permissions):

```bash
$ npm install -g npm@latest
```

Then, install dependencies and build all sources.
It's best to run the build before opening your IDE, as we generate some sources.

```bash
$ npm install
$ npm run build
```

You can also run all tests to ensure that everything is working as expected:

```bash
$ npm run test
```

**Note:**
When running these commands from the top-level directory, it will be run in all subprojects automatically.
You can also run them in each subproject to achieve the same result.
Note that some subprojects also support `npm run tscw` or `npm run wpw` to have things rebuild automatically on file save.

## Viewing documentation

TypeDoc documentation is created in the docs/ directory of each subpackage as part of `npm run build`. You can view it by opening docs/index.html in a browser.

## How to run the local server?

Run the following command under root folder `/compoventuals`, the local server will listen on port `3000`:

```bash
$ npm start
```

Access the service via `localhost:3000`, look at the console to see outputs of current deployment.

If you need to connect using https due to browser restrictions (e.g. for Matrix widgets), instead run

```bash
$ npm start https
```

Then access the service via `https://localhost:3000/`, accept the self-signed certificate warning, and continue as usual. Of course, don't use this https setup for anything serious, since the server key is public.

## How to build on Heroku?

Deploys to https://compoventuals-tests.herokuapp.com/

- The Heroku deployment will be automatically triggered by `git commit` and `git push`.
- The Heroku server will run `npm install` and `npm build` to build the project, and `npm start` to run it (according to Procfile).

Options for manual deployment:

- Log in your Heroku with CLI tool and verify on browser:

```
heroku login
```

- Create a heroku project on your machine by running (in the repo's top-level directory):

```
heroku create
```

This should also create a git remote repo named `heroku`. See [here](https://devcenter.heroku.com/articles/git#creating-a-heroku-remote) for how to customize or repair this if needed.

- Commit and push the code on Heroku master just like the way you do on Github:

```
git add ${selected files}
git commit -m ${commit messages}
git push heroku master
```

## Development

We recommend setting up "Format on Save" in your editor.
See [Prettier's editor setup instructions](https://prettier.io/docs/en/editors.html).

If you don't set this, you'll need to run `npm run fix` in the top-level directory before committing and pushing your code to github. Otherwise, the CI will complain that the format is wrong.

## Module support

All packages that are libraries meant to be used in a browser
compile to both ESM and CommonJS modules. This means that they
should work both with bundlers like Webpack (permitting intelligent
tree shaking) and Node.js.

Although the ESM builds are .js files, they cannot be used directly
in a browser; they require a bundler like Webpack. This is
because TypeScript does not add .js file extensions to import
statements, nor does it expand directory imports to include
"/index.js".

## License

Licensed under Apache 2.0.

Created by Matthew Weidner, Heather Miller, Huairui Qi, Maxime Kjaer, Ria Pradeep, Ignacio Maronna, and Benito Geordie at [CMU's Composable Systems Lab](https://www.composablesystems.org/).
