collabs/docs/internals.md, before:

# Internals

## Core Library

Coming soon

<!-- TODO: Tree of CRDTs etc.

CRDT algs (primitives, Crdt subclasses, movable list from Martin)
Mention (speculative) non-interleaving (double RGA).

Somewhere: mention useful features like batching, LWW consistency (setting many registers at once works as expected) - so long as you do ops in one thread. Avoid weird intermediate states due to batching and events. -->

## Built-in Collaborative Data Types

Our built-in collaborative data types are implemented as [Conflict-free Replicated Data Types (CRDTs)](https://crdt.tech/) - specifically, [operation-based CRDTs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conflict-free_replicated_data_type#Operation-based_CRDTs).

Traditionally, operation-based CRDTs are described in terms of sending and receiving messages, like our `CPrimitive` type (plus direct `Crdt` subclasses). However, only a few of our collaborative types are implemented directly like this; instead, most of them are compositions of other types.

More info coming soon.

Commit message:

Cleanup (#205)
* minor renamings

* setup eslint for collabs

* make linter play nice with Atom

* make linter pass

* work on TODOs in core

* finish README.md files

* docs misc todos

* mark unpublished packages as private

* Json -> JSON

* wrap event handlers in try-catch

* fix container-testing-server chmod issue

* Collab Change event -> Any

* crdt -> collab or CRDT where justified

* collabs: misc easy TODOs

* DeletingMutCSet: better UIDs; delete idOf

* misc code TODOs

* finish Collab typedoc

* load(null) on dynamic values

* remove unused benchmark scripts

* remaining ElementSerializer -> Serializer

* add locations to CList for React; refactor cursors

collabs/docs/internals.md, after:

# Internals

## Core Library

Coming soon

<!-- TODO: Tree of Collabs etc.

CRDT algs (primitives, Collab subclasses, movable list from Martin)
Mention (speculative) non-interleaving (double RGA).

Somewhere: mention useful features like batching, LWW consistency (setting many registers at once works as expected) - so long as you do ops in one thread. Avoid weird intermediate states due to batching and events. -->

## Built-in Collaborative Data Structures

Our built-in collaborative data structures are implemented as [Conflict-free Replicated Data Types (CRDTs)](https://crdt.tech/) - specifically, [operation-based CRDTs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conflict-free_replicated_data_type#Operation-based_CRDTs).

Traditionally, operation-based CRDTs are described in terms of sending and receiving messages, like our `PrimitiveCRDT` class (plus direct `Collab` subclasses). However, only a few of our `Collab`s are implemented directly like this; instead, most of them are compositions of other data structures.

More info coming soon.
