demos/rich-text-yata/README.md, before:

# Rich Text Demo (Experimental YATA + Semidirect)

A collaborative rich text editor using [Quill](https://quilljs.com/), as a [Collabs container](TODO: guide link).

This demo uses YATA instead of the built-in CRDT sequence algorithm, and it uses a semidirect product to better preserver user intention: if you type in the middle of a block of text while someone else changes its formatting, your new text will get the block formatting. Currently, the Quill integration is a bit behind the other rich text demo, hence the label "experimental".

Author: Benito Geordie.

Based off of [template-container](TODO).

## Installation

First, install [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/). Then run `npm i`.

## Commands

### `npm run dev`

Build the container from `src/`, in [development mode](https://webpack.js.org/guides/development/).

### `npm run build`

Build the container from `src/`, in [production mode](https://webpack.js.org/guides/production/) (smaller output files; longer build time; no source maps).

### `npm start`

Run the testing server. Open [http://localhost:3000/](http://localhost:3000/) to view. Use multiple browser windows at once to test collaboration.

See [container-testing-server](TODO) for usage info.

### `npm run clean`

Delete `dist/`.

## Deployment

`dist/rich_text_yata.html` is a [standalone container](TODO: guide about how works offline, in sandbox, easily redistributed, etc.). It can used in any [container host](TODO).

Commit message:

Improve container/app saving & loading, app interface refactor, and demo improvements (#210)
* void Promise for eslint

* commitBatch before saving

* load: Optional instead of | null

* always call load

* clarify protobuf hacks

* rewrite ContainerHost as CRDTContainerHost

* rewrite ContainerAppSource as CRDTContainer

* clarify container load process

* integrate new container into counter demo

* container-testing-server: hide container while loading

* container-testing-server: don't overflow unnecessarily

* simplify container-testing-server

* add save/load test buttons to container-testing-server

* refactor demos

* reorder init sequence

* container load: return sooner, delay furtherMessages

* make server compile

* remove BroadcastNetwork; add "further messages" loading step

* refactor networks

* add CRDTContainer.ready

* pass tests

* proper container init and compaction in selector, tile board

* fix CollabSerializer bug that affected loading

* debug demos

* revamp demo server pages

* add info pages to demos

* add HTTP redirect for old host.html

* selector: remove already-loaded case

* test matrix demos

* remove CRDTContainer args

* docs

demos/rich-text-yata/README.md, after:

# Rich Text Demo (YATA + Semidirect)

A collaborative rich text editor using [Quill](https://quilljs.com/), as a [Collabs container](https://github.com/composablesys/collabs/blob/master/collabs/docs/containers.md).

This demo uses YATA instead of the built-in CRDT sequence algorithm, and it uses a semidirect product to better preserver user intention: if you type in the middle of a block of text while someone else changes its formatting, your new text will get the block formatting.

Author: Benito Geordie.

Based off of [template-container](https://github.com/composablesys/collabs/tree/master/template-container).

## Installation

First, install [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/). Then run `npm i`.

## Commands

### `npm run dev`

Build the container from `src/`, in [development mode](https://webpack.js.org/guides/development/).

### `npm run build`

Build the container from `src/`, in [production mode](https://webpack.js.org/guides/production/) (smaller output files; longer build time; no source maps).

### `npm start`

Run the testing server. Open [http://localhost:3000/](http://localhost:3000/) to view. Use multiple browser windows at once to test collaboration.

See [@collabs/container-testing-server](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@collabs/container-testing-server) for usage info.

### `npm run clean`

Delete `dist/`.

## Deployment

`dist/rich_text_yata.html` is the compiled container. It can used in any container host.

## Note

This demo builds off of Collabs' `SemidirectProductRev`, which is not currently maintained while we think about replacements. So newer features might break in the demo. In particular, saving will throw an error.
